Improved Variational Autoencoders for Text Modeling using Dilated Convolutions

Society
Science
Health what is the difference between UNK and UNK

do you think there is a god ?
how many orbitals are there in outer space ? how many orbitals are there in the solar system ?

Education what is the difference between a computer and a UNK ?
Computers

how can i make ﬂash mp3 ﬁles ? i want to know how to make a ﬂash video so i can upload it to
my mp3 player ?

Sports who is the best soccer player in the world ?
Business what is the best way to make money online ?

Music who is the best artist of all time ?
how do i know if a guy likes me ?

Relationships

Politics what do you think about Iran ?

Society what is the meaning of life ?
Science what is the difference between kinetic energy and heat ?
Health what is the best way to get rid of migraine headaches ?

Education what is the best way to study for a good future ?
Computers what is the best way to install windows xp home edition ?
Sports who do you think will win the super bowl this year ?

Business

i would like to know what is the best way to get a good paying job ?

Entertainment what do you think is the best movie ever ?
Relationships what is the best way to get over a broken heart ?
Politics what do you think about the war in iraq ?

Mathematics

Society what would you do if you had a million dollars ?
i need help with this math problem !
Health what is the best way to lose weight ?
Education what is the best college in the world ?
Computers what is the best way to get a new computer ?

Sports who should i start ?

Business what is the best way to get a good paying job ?

Entertainment who do you think is the hottest guy in the world ?
Relationships what should i do ?

Politics who do you think will be the next president of the united states ?

do you believe in ghosts ?

Society
Science why is the sky blue ?
Health what is the best way to get rid of a cold ?

Reference what do you do when you are bored ?

Computers why ca n’t i watch videos on my computer ? when i try to watch videos on my computer , i ca

n’t get it to work on my computer . can anyone help ?

Sports what do you think about the UNK game ?

Business what is the best way to get a job ?

Entertainment what is your favorite tv show ?
Relationships

how do you know when a guy likes you ?

Politics what do you think about this ?

Society what is the name of the prophet muhammad ( pbuh ) ? i do n’t know if he is a jew or not .
Science where can i ﬁnd a picture of the UNK UNK UNK UNK ? i need to know the name of the

insect that has the name of the whale .
Health what is the best way to get rid of a UNK mole ?

Reference

Computers
Sports
Business
Music
Relationship

does anyone know where i can ﬁnd info on UNK UNK UNK ? i am looking for the name of
the UNK UNK .
does anyone know where i can ﬁnd a picture of a friend ’s cell phone ?
does anyone know where i can ﬁnd a biography of UNK ?
does anyone know where i can ﬁnd a copy of the UNK ?
does anyone know the name of the song and who sings it ?
how do i tell my boyfriend that i love him ? he is my best friend , but i dont know how to tell
him . please help ! ! ! ! ! !
Politics where is osama bin laden ?

Table 7: Text generated by conditioning on topic label.

Improved Variational Autoencoders for Text Modeling using Dilated Convolutions

1 star

2 star
3 star
4 star

the food is good , but the service is terrible . i have been here three times and each time the
service has been horrible . the last time we were there , we had to wait a long time for our food
to come out . when we ﬁnally got our food , the food was cold and the service was terrible . i
will not be back .
this place used to be one of my favorite places to eat in the area .
i ’ve been here a few times , and the food has always been good .
this is one of my favorite places to eat in the phoenix area . the food is good , and the service is
friendly .

5 star my husband and i love this place . the food is great , the service is great , and the prices are

reasonable .

1 star

this is the worst hotel i have ever been to . the room was dirty , the bathroom was dirty , and the
room was ﬁlthy .

2 star my husband and i decided to try this place because we had heard good things about it so we

decided to give it a try . the service was good , but the food was mediocre at best .

3 star we came here on a saturday night with a group of friends . we were seated right away and the
service was great . the food was good , but not great . the service was good and the atmosphere
was nice .

4 star my husband and i came here for brunch on a saturday night . the place was packed so we were
able to sit outside on the patio . we had a great view of the bellagio fountains and had a great
view of the bellagio fountains . we sat at the bar and had a great view of the bellagio fountains .
5 star my husband and i came here for the ﬁrst time last night and had a great time ! the food was
amazing , the service was great , and the atmosphere was perfect . we will be back !

1 star
2 star
3 star
4 star
5 star

this is the worst place i have ever been to . i will never go back .
i was very disappointed with the quality of the food and the service . i will not be returning .
this was my ﬁrst time at this location and i have to say it was a good experience .
this is a great place to grab a bite to eat with friends or family .
i am so happy to have found a great place to get my nails done .

1 star my wife and i have been going to this restaurant for years . the last few times i have been , the
service has been terrible . the last time we were there , we had to wait a long time for our food
to arrive . the food is good , but not worth the wait .
2 star
the food is good , but the service leaves something to be desired .
3 star
i have been here a few times . the food is consistently good , and the service is good .
4 star my wife and i have been here a few times . the food is consistently good , and the service is

5 star my husband and i have been coming here for years .

the food is consistently good and the

friendly .

service is always great .

the food was good but the service was terrible . we had to wait 45 minutes for our food to come
out and it was cold . i will not be back .
the food was good but the service was terrible . we had a party of 6 and the food took forever
to come out . the food was good but not worth the price .
the food was good but the service was a little slow . we had to wait a while for our food and it
was n’t even busy .
i have been here a few times and have never been disappointed . the food was great and the
service was great . we will be back .

5 star my husband and i have been here a few times and have never been disappointed . the food was

great and the service was great . i will deﬁnitely be back !

if i could give this place zero stars i would . i do not recommend this place to anyone !
i do n’t know what all the hype is about this place , but i do n’t think i will be back .
i do n’t know what all the hype is about this place , but i do n’t think i ’ll be back .
i ’ve been here a couple of times and have never been disappointed .
service is friendly , and the prices are reasonable .
this is the best ramen i ’ve ever had in my life , and i ’ve never had a bad meal here !

the food is fresh , the

this is the worst company i have ever dealt with . they do n’t know what they are doing .
this is the worst buffet i have ever been to in my life . the food was just ok , nothing to write
home about .
not a bad place to stay if you ’re looking for a cheap place to stay .
this is a great place to stay if you ’re looking for a quick bite .
i love this place ! the staff is very friendly and helpful and the price is right !

Table 8: Text generated by conditioning on sentiment label.

1 star

2 star

3 star

4 star

1 star
2 star
3 star
4 star

5 star

1 star
2 star

3 star
4 star
5 star

